T&T’s Grindbygg, 2013:
I met T&T when they came to North House Folk School to construct the frame for their 10x16 straw bale enclosed starter home in the summer of 2012.  The following winter, they contacted me about a design for their workshop with the following parameters: straw bale enclosure, living roof, minimally processed logs from their site for the frame.  We quickly settled on a Norwegian Grindbygg style frame which has a long history of incorporating natural wall systems, strong roofs to support sod or thick slate, and round or only partially hewn logs.  After some discussion of just how to accomplish the frame construction, we decided to make it a class on-site at T&T’s homestead in Vermont.  T&T recruited students from as far away as Mexico and Texas for the course in August 2013.  This was a large and challenging project for me and the students.  We extended the course by 2 days to complete the main frame.  T&T finished off the rafters in the weeks following the course.  It is a spectacular structure - the round logs and natural curves give a wonderful softness which belies its scale.  See more great photos at: http://journal.goingslowly.com/2013/08/monthly-photo-post

Grindbygg Boat House, 2013:
This project was the catalyst for my trip to Norway in the fall of 2012 to learn grindbygg construction techniques.  As is true with so many great projects, it started with the spark of an idea, of shared mission, when the North Shore Commercial Fishing Museum contacted North House Folk School about possibly constructing a timber frame in a class to protect an old herring skiff.   I suggested pairing the history of the fishermen from Norway settling on the shores of Lake Superior with a Norwegian grindbygg frame.  The idea took hold and all the pieces just fell into place: grant funding for the project and my trip to Norway, material harvesting for the tamarack root knees and curved birch for bracing and the Red Pine pole rafters, good class enrollment, and lots of enthusiasm.  The frame was dedicated at the Museum in August 2013.  As far as I know, this is the first grindbygg structure in Minnesota.

Tara and Tyler’s Grindbygg:
This grindbygg frame was designed to utilize round logs, primarily dead ash and maple, from the building site.  It will have a living roof and straw bale walls.  I taught a class during which we constructed the majority of the frame on site in Vermont.

Grindbygg Boat House:
This project was the catalyst for my trip to Norway to learn grindbygg construction techniques.  The frame has tamarack root knees, curved birch braces, and pole rafters.  The frame was constructed for the North Shore Commercial Fishing Museum in a class I taught at North House Folk School.
CAD drawing attached.  Need a good finished photo

St Olaf  Chime Tower and Art Barn:
I have worked with St Olaf College on two projects, from design through raising.  The joinery for both frames was cut at North House with groups of St Olaf faculty and staff.  Memorial Chime Tower, 2002. Re-creation of the Flatten Art Barn, 2007 (raised in 2012).

High School Trade-Tech Program Bridge:
Every year I teach a program at North House Folk School for two local high schools (Cook County High School in Grand Marais and William Kelley High School in Silver Bay).  During the course we cut and raise a frame.  Proceeds from the sale of the timber frame fund the program.  In 2013 we built a covered bridge I designed for the Grand Marais Municipal campground.
Need photos

Vinsted – North Folk Winery :
I worked with the North Folk Winery in 2011 to design the frame for their “Vinsted”.  The frame joinery was completed at North House Folk School in a custom scheduled Build Your Own Timber Frame - Large Frames session.  I led the raising with the help of many of the 30+ people who cut the frame.

St Olaf College Chime Tower and Art Barn:
I have worked with St Olaf College on two projects, from design through raising.  The joinery for both frames was cut at North House Folk School with diverse groups of St Olaf faculty and staff: deans, office staff, professors, lecturers, maintenance workers and carpenters.
The Chime Tower design started with a photo taken of a white-board sketch and then fleshed out by a St Olaf draftsmen.  From that, I created the frame and joinery design. The overarching idea was to maintain open space within the roof to hang wind chimes, one for each person who had died while a student at the college. We chose to use standing dead harvested Western Larch for its sustainability, taking into account the trees past life as well as future rot resistance.  The frame was cut and raised in 2002.
The original Art Barn was designed and constructed by the first art professor at St Olaf, Arnold Flaten in 1932.  Though not a timber framed structure, it was embellished with carved timbers.  When the Art Barn was slated for demolition to make room for a new science center, the Flatten family donated money for a re-construction.  I was given the original drawings and then created the frame to match the exterior dimensions, open interior spaces and reflect the original design and intent.  We utilized a mix of reclaimed White and Red Pine from a grainery in Superior, Wisconsin and standing dead Western Larch. The frame was cut in 2007 and raised in 2012. http://wp.stolaf.edu/blog/reconstruction-of-flaten-art-barn-turns-old-into-new/
https://www.facebook.com/media/set/?set=a.10151083433848332.542243.136842418331&type=3

High School Trade-Tech Program:
Every year I teach a program at North House Folk School with two local high schools (Cook County High School in Grand Marais and William Kelley High School in Silver Bay). The program started in 2006 with grant dollars and timbers donated by Hedstrom Lumber Company.  Since then the program has been self-supporting by sale of the timber frame constructed each year. We generally spend five full days in the shop cutting the frame and two days fitting and raising. In 2013 we built a covered bridge for the Grand Marais Municipal campground.
Need photos

Vinsted – North Folk Winery, 2011 :
This frame design started as a cabin for M & A & family but morphed into the “Vinsted” with the expansion of their winery. They liked the parallel chord truss I had used for the North House Fish House design with multiple X’s (pulled loosely from the St Andrew’s crosses of the Stav Churches of Norway). The frame joinery was completed at North House Folk School in a custom scheduled Build Your Own Timber Frame - Large Frames session.  More than 30 family and friends helped cut the frame in the 12 days at North House.  Many of these same people reconvened to assist with the frame raising.
The cabin is still in the plans - in a simpler form.  M & A will once again be recruiting family and friends to help in the project at North House in 2014.